knitcitations
=============

An automated way to generate citations by dynamic lookup using Crossref DOIs or by bibtex files.


Markdown is becoming an increasingly popular platform for lightweight and online publishing.  While traditional publishing tools like LaTeX and word processors have long had intergated biobliographic management, few tools handle citations for lightweight publishing. I am finding myself more and more drawn to markdown rather then tex/Rnw as my standard format (not least of which is the ease of displaying the files on github, particularly now that we have automatic image uploading.   I've taken a little whack at generating in-text citations using knitr and other R tools. 

### DOI Approach
I've put some simple functions in a `knitcitations` package.  The functions use the crossref API to grab citation information given a doi, so I don't have to generate a bibtex file for papers I'm reading.  This functionality is inspired by the [kcite](http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/kcite/) package for Wordpress.  The `knitcitations` package can be installed from Github


```r
library(devtools)
install_github("knitcitations", "cboettig")
```


and load the package


```r
require(knitcitations)
```




Then we can generate a citation given a doi with the `ref` function:




### Bibtex Approach

If we have a bibtex file, we can use this for the citations as well.  Let's start off by getting ourselves a bibtex file from some of R's packages: 


```r
library(bibtex)
write.bib(c('bibtex', 'knitr', 'knitcitations'), file="example.bib")
```




Now we can simply read in the bibtex files: 


```r
biblio <- read.bib("example.bib")
biblio[[1]]
```



```
Francois R (2011). _bibtex: bibtex parser_. R package version
0.3-1/r332, <URL: http://R-Forge.R-project.org/projects/highlight/>.
```



(This would be much more awesome if we could generate keys on write.bib and use those bibtex keys, instead of the index value, `[[1]]`, to generate the citation.)


### Using the inline citations 
Now that we can get citation information from bibtex files or dois, we need a way to insert these citations into the text.  I've written a simple `citep`  print inline citations that would just use a given shortened format (e.g. author-year) and add the citation to a `works_cited` object, which we could then use to generate the full citation information at the end.  We can generate inline citations by giving a doi, bibentry object, or a list thereof, into inline knitr code block. Thus we can use the line   `citep("10.1111/j.1461-0248.2005.00827.x")` to generate a parenthetical citation, (Halpern _et. al._ 2006). We can also generate textual citations with `citet`, such as Francois, (2011).  Parenthetical citations can take more than one entry, (Xie, 2012; Boettiger, 2012). 

### Generating the final bibliography
As we go along adding inline citations, R stores the list of citation info.  Then at the end of the document, use this command to print the bibliography generated by the use of our inline citations. 


```r
bibliography()
```

Halpern B, Regan H, Possingham H and McCarthy M (2006). "Accounting for
uncertainty in marine reserve design." _Ecology Letters_, *9*. ISSN
1461-023X, <URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2005.00827.x>.

Francois R (2011). _bibtex: bibtex parser_. R package version
0.3-1/r332, <URL: http://R-Forge.R-project.org/projects/highlight/>.

Xie Y (2012). _knitr: A general-purpose package for dynamic report
generation in R_. R package version 0.4.1, <URL:
http://yihui.name/knitr/>.

Boettiger C (2012). _knitcitations: Citations for knitr markdown
files_. R package version 0.0-1.



I hope to add markup to format this a bit more nicely later.  For instance, we want the links to appear as real links.  Additionally, we may want to add markup around the citations, such as the reason for the citation into the link using the [Citation Typing Ontology](http://speroni.web.cs.unibo.it/cgi-bin/lode/req.py?req=http:/purl.org/spar/cito). 






